https://www.americanbar.org/groups/real_property_trust_estate/resources/estate_planning/

Estate Planning Info & FAQs
Share this:
   
What is Estate Planning?

Estate planning is a process involving the counsel of professional advisors who are familiar with your goals and concerns, your assets and how they are owned, and your family structure. It can involve the services of a variety of professionals, including your lawyer, accountant, financial planner, life insurance advisor, banker and broker.

 

Estate planning covers the transfer of property at death as well as a variety of other personal matters and may or may not involve tax planning. The core document most often associated with this process is your will.

Estate Planning Overview

Estate, Gift, and GST Taxes
Glossary of Estate Planning Terms
An Introduction to Wills

Frequently Asked Questions about Wills

What Happens If You Die Without A Will?
What A Will Does
What A Will Does Not Do
How To Execute a Will
Types of Non-probate Property

Jointly Owned Property
Trusts
Annuities and Retirement Benefits
Life Insurance
Revocable Trusts

What is a Revocable Living Trust?
Power of Attorney

Questions Regarding Power-of-Attorney

Introduction
Who Should Be Your Agent?
How The Agent Should Sign?
Beyond Signing Checks
State Laws Vary

What if I move?
Will my Power of Attorney expire?
Living Wills, Health Care Proxies, and Advance Health Care Directives

Questions Regarding Living Wills

Introduction
Living Wills
Health Care Proxy
Why Have Health Directives?
Obtaining and Maintaining Living Wills and Health Care Proxies
Organ and Tissue Donation
Communication is the Key
Other Resources on Living Wills
The Probate Process

What is Probate?
Should you Avoid Probate?
Planning With Retirement Benefits

Introduction
Income Taxation of Qualified Plans and IRAs
Distribution of Plan Assets to the Participant
Distribution of Plan Assets After the Participant's Death
Estate Tax Considerations
Planning Considerations
Guidelines for Individual Executors and Trustees

Introduction
Understanding The Will
Managing Estate Assets
Handling Debts & Expenses
Funding the Bequests
Trust Administration
Closing the Estate
Common Questions
The Lawyer's Role and "Do It Yourself" Estate Planning

What is the Lawyer's Role?
Do It Yourself Estate Planning
Asset Protection Planning

Overview of Asset Protection Planning
Disclaimer

This site is provided as a public service by the ABA Real Property, Trust and Estate Law Section. While the information on this site is about legal issues, it is not legal advice or legal representation. Because of the rapidly changing nature of the law and our reliance upon outside sources, we make no warranty or guarantee of the accuracy or reliability of information contained herein.
